Graphframes pregel tutorial (#4)
rjurney/graphframes: docs/src/03-tutorials/04-pregel-tutorial.md

# Pregel Tutorial

> This tutorial covers GraphFrames' @:pydoc(graphframes.lib.Pregel) API for developing scalable, iterative graph algorithms using **Apache Spark 4.0**. We will build progressively complex algorithms — from simple degree counting to custom reputation propagation — using the same Stack Exchange knowledge graph from the [Motif Finding Tutorial](02-motif-tutorial.md).

Author: ```suggestion
This tutorial covers GraphFrames' @:pydoc(graphframes.lib.Pregel) API for developing scalable, iterative graph algorithms using **Apache Spark 4.0**. We will implement progressively complex algorithms — from simple degree counting to path-tracing algorithms — using the same Stack Exchange knowledge graph from the [Motif Finding Tutorial](02-motif-tutorial.md).
```

[Pregel](https://15799.courses.cs.cmu.edu/fall2013/static/papers/p135-malewicz.pdf) is a vertex-centric programming model for distributed graph processing. It was introduced by Google engineers in 2010 and has become the foundation for graph computation at scale. GraphFrames implements the Pregel model using Apache Spark DataFrames, giving you the full power of Spark's query optimizer and distributed execution engine behind a clean, declarative API.

By the end of this tutorial, you will understand how to think in Pregel — how to decompose graph problems into local vertex computations that converge to global solutions through iterative message passing. This is a fundamentally different way of thinking about graph algorithms, and it unlocks computations that are difficult or impossible to express with traditional graph queries or even GraphFrames' built-in algorithms.

The complete source code for this tutorial is in @:srcLink(python/graphframes/tutorials/pregel.py).

> 

Author: Remove extra newline.

**`run()`**: Execute the algorithm and return a DataFrame with the original vertex columns plus the new `in_degree` column.

Notice the key difference from AggregateMessages: Pregel **automatically handles zero-degree vertices**. Because `withVertexColumn` initializes every vertex to 0 and the update expression uses `F.coalesce(Pregel.msg(), F.lit(0))`, vertices that receive no messages keep their initial value of 0. No LEFT JOIN needed.

## AggregateMessages vs. Pregel

| Feature | AggregateMessages | Pregel |
|---------|-------------------|--------|
| **Iterations** | Single pass only | Multiple with `setMaxIter()` |
| **Vertex State** | Manual (pre-create columns) | Automatic (`withVertexColumn`) |
| **Zero-degree nodes** | Dropped (need LEFT JOIN) | Handled via initial values |
| **Syntax** | Functional, lower-level | Builder pattern, declarative |
| **Best For** | One-off aggregations | Iterative algorithms |

For simple metrics like degree, either API works. For everything that follows, Pregel is the only option.

> 

Author: Remove extra whitespace.

The early stopping optimization is crucial here. Without it, Pregel would run all 20 iterations even after convergence. With it, the algorithm halts as soon as the minimum labels stop propagating — which often happens in 5-10 iterations for real-world social graphs.

You can verify convergence speed by adding some logging. Run with a few different `maxIter` values and compare the results — you'll find the same component labels regardless of whether you set `maxIter` to 10, 20, or 100, as long as it's high enough.

## A Note on the Built-in Algorithm

GraphFrames provides `g.connectedComponents()` which uses a more sophisticated implementation with checkpointing and GraphX integration. For production workloads, the built-in version may be faster due to its optimizations. But the Pregel version is instructive and can be customized — for example, you could add type-aware component detection where edges of certain types are ignored.

> 

Author: Remove extra newline.

<center>
    <figure>
        <img src="../img/pregel-diagrams/pregel-debug-trace.svg" width="700px" alt="Debug trace showing message paths" />
        <figcaption>Message path tracing: each vertex records where its information came from</figcaption>
    </figure>
</center>

```python
# Small test graph for clarity
test_vertices = spark.createDataFrame(
    [("A", "Alice"), ("B", "Bob"), ("C", "Charlie"), ("D", "David")],
    ["id", "name"],
)
test_edges = spark.createDataFrame(
    [("A", "B"), ("A", "C"), ("B", "C"), ("C", "D")],
    ["src", "dst"],
)
test_graph = GraphFrame(test_vertices, test_edges)

trace_results = test_graph.pregel \
    .setMaxIter(3) \
    .withVertexColumn(
        "trace",
        F.col("id"),
        F.concat_ws(
            " <- ",
            F.coalesce(Pregel.msg(), F.lit("")),
            F.col("id")
        )
    ) \
    .sendMsgToDst(Pregel.src("trace")) \
    .aggMsgs(
        F.concat_ws(" | ", F.collect_list(Pregel.msg()))
    ) \
    .run()

trace_results.select("id", "name", "trace").orderBy("id").show(truncate=False)
```

> 

Author: Show the value of debug prints as this Pregel algorithm runs, print the DataFrame and show the values at th end?

**`setMaxIter(n)`**: The simplest — run for exactly `n` supersteps. Good for algorithms with known iteration counts (PageRank typically converges in 10-20 iterations).

**`setEarlyStopping(True)`**: Stop when no non-null messages are produced. Good for BFS-like algorithms (shortest paths, connected components) where the frontier eventually stops expanding. *Warning*: checking for empty messages is a Spark action, so it adds overhead per iteration. Don't use for algorithms like PageRank where messages are never null.

**Vertex voting** via `setStopIfAllNonActiveVertices(True)` with `setInitialActiveVertexExpression(expr)` and `setUpdateActiveVertexExpression(expr)`: The most general approach. Each vertex has an active flag. You define expressions for when vertices should be active. When all vertices become inactive, the algorithm terminates. This is closest to the original Pregel paper's "vote to halt" mechanism.

For PageRank with tolerance-based convergence, vertex voting looks like:

```python
graph.pregel \
    .setMaxIter(100) \
    .setStopIfAllNonActiveVertices(True) \
    .setUpdateActiveVertexExpression(
        F.abs(F.col("pagerank") - Pregel.msg()) > F.lit(0.001)

>     ) \

Author: Verify this fits the API in question and fix if needed.

- **Non-iterative queries**: If you can express it as a single SQL query on vertices and edges, don't add the overhead of Pregel's superstep machinery.

# Conclusion

We covered a lot of ground in this tutorial. Starting from the simplest possible graph metric (in-degree), we progressed through increasingly sophisticated algorithms to custom reputation propagation — an algorithm that doesn't exist in any graph library but was straightforward to implement with Pregel.

Here is the core pattern that every Pregel algorithm follows:

```python
result = graph.pregel \
    .setMaxIter(n) \
    .withVertexColumn("state", initial_value, update_function) \
    .sendMsgToDst(message_expression) \
    .aggMsgs(aggregation_function) \
    .run()
```

The art of Pregel programming is in choosing the right:
- **Vertex state**: What does each vertex need to remember?
- **Messages**: What information do neighbors need to share?
- **Aggregation**: How do multiple messages combine?
- **Update**: How does new information change the vertex's state?

If you can answer these four questions for your problem, you can implement it in Pregel.

> ## Pattern Library

Author: Remove this section, too long.
